'''
https://physicstoday.scitation.org/pto/info/physics2000
What significant advance made in your field since 2000 deserves wider recognition among nonexperts? We invite you to write an essay for Physics Today that describes the advance, how it was made, and why it is important.
Entries should be no longer than 2000 words and be written at a level appropriate for the range of physical scientists, including students, who read Physics Today. Entries should not have been published previously.
particle density is ~3E20 vs 3E22 of air
temp is ~50E6

'''

Brilliant Ring of Fire

Modern society needs electricity. This is unambiguous. Subtler is it's need for steady electricity. Going without air conditioning is one thing, but the neonatal intensive care unit can hardly let it's ventilators stop working for even a minute. But we also need power supplies that have manageable consequences. We can't be spewing byproducts indifferently assuming that future generations will handle it. A third constraint is compactness, this is not so much a technical or ethical constraint as a political one. Given how much society depends on electricity, a nation will be incredibly hesitant to depend on power that comes from a neighboring nation.

Stability, cleanliness and compactness. These three criterion might all be simultaneously satisfied by nuclear fusion. And while much ink has been spent on the future of ITER, it's worth celebrating what /actually/ been done with the Wendelstein 7

---

In 1874 a new thing was finished in St. Louis. Taking advantage of recent understanding in newtonian statics and exploiting the advances in metallurgy allowing construction quantities of the futuristic metal known as steel to be used, a bridge was made to span the Mississippi river. At nearly 2 kilometers, The Eads Bridge was the biggest of it's time. It's first test was executed using the sophisticated method of getting an elephant to walk over it, as at the time elephants were believed to have an innate sense of solid ground. Nearly 150 years later, a different, but related engineering feat was put to the test.

At the Max Planck institute the Wendelstein 7 achieved first plasma in 2015 thanks to new understanding of plasma dynamics and advances in materials science allowing the superconducting magnetic coils to be malleable and numerous enough to build the largest stellarator fusion device in the world. Let's think for a moment on what a mile stone it is.

Plasma is often referred to as the fourth state of matter, the result of heating gasses to the point where the atoms in them have enough kinetic energy to dislodge electrons and change a neutral gas into a collection positive and negative charges flying about freely. Free charges like these interact over much longer ranges than when they are bound together, as students who have grappled with multi-pole expansions might have guessed.  These new long range interactions lead to incredibly complicated dynamics that often times take the system away from thermodynamic equilibrium where all of our most comfortable solutions in statistical mechanics are applicable.

---
Let us discuss the most fantastical metalo-ceramic donut in the world, the Wendelstein 7X. In 2015 it lit first plasma and took its title as the largest confined plasma in the world, along side its title of unusually useful things that look like sculpted baked goods. The Wendelstein 7X has a confinement geometry of the stellarator type. This is distinct from the tokamaks that have dominated most of the research projects for the last few decades as it is symmetric around it's up and down axis. In other words you would be able to notice it spinning atop a  merry go round.

For the unfamiliar, confining a plasma is rather tricky because it tends to be incredibly, unfathomably hot. Temperatures that are in the "that's just a big number" regime of things. To try and build up a scale, an electric stove top that's glowing red hot will be in the 500 kelvin range. Ten times hotter than that we get to the surface of the sun in the neighborhood of 5000 kelvin. But since stellarators are trying to explore and emulate some of the physics that happens /inside/ stars, the surface isn't going to cut it and we need to get a thousand times hotter, into the 5 /million/ kelvin range of things. Alas, we're not done ramping up yet as the sun can get by generating about as much heat as a backyard compost pile as it makes up on efficiency by literally being the biggest single thing in our solar system. The Wendelstein 7X is designed to accommodate temperatures 10 times hotter than the core of our sun, 50 million kelvin. This is, at risk of belaboring a point, rather piping hot and your standard issue oven mitts really will not suffice.

At this point we would be right to conclude we can't exactly "hold" a plasma the way we hold say, water or steam. It might be better to think of it as "guiding" a plasma. Normal gasses are made up of electrons and nuclei bound together, a property of plasmas is that instead of being tightly bound together, these electrons and nuclei are independent of each other. Which means they can be much more strongly effected by Electric and Magnetic fields. One of the early bits you do in an Electricity and Magnetism course is show that a single charged particle will travel in loops around constant magnetic fields but freely move /along/ them. This leads us to think that if you made magnetic field lines go in a loop, a plasma will be guided along like cars around a simple race track. The simplest shape that accomplishes that goal is the humble toroid. Imagine a basic donut wrapped in wire, and run a current through that. Now, while wrapping wire around a baguette and turning it on generates a uniform magnetic field, the donut does not. The magnetic field ends up being stronger towards the donut hole and weaker on the edge. Between that and the fact the fields curve around the donut hole instead of going straight, a whole heap of problems crop up. Mostly because of what helped us get this far in the first place, the plasma is charged and not only can be guided by fields, but it's movement also /makes/ fields.

Going into much depth as to the causes of these problems, also known as instabilities is a rich and diverse subject that has literally taken up person-centuries of work so I hope you'll allow me to gloss over it. The glossed over version is that a bare minimum for guiding plasma is that we have to make it run laps both around the donut hole, /and/ around the donut dough itself. This second kind of looping is accomplished if the magnetic fields have a poloidal component, which is just the mathematical term for the round-the-dough kind of looping.

One of the leading approaches to getting the poloidal field is coaxing the plasma into providing it itself. If you can coax the electrons to move more or less in one way around the donut hole, and the ions to move, as a group, at a different speed, you'll get a net current which will produce a poloidal field. There are a few problems with this approach though: Getting the current started, keeping the current going and keeping the current under control. The easiest way to get the current started is by the method of induction. By slowly turning on large electromagnets sandwiching our chamber, a current in the plasma will be induced going in the opposite direction. The downside of this is that this current is only induced while the electromagnets are being turned on and so it's intrinsically going to be a pulsed sort of affair, constantly ramping up and down. And while this tremendous current is running it has a whole slew of it's own instabilities. Keeping them in check introduces a new set of engineering challenges which runs somewhat counter to the point of having a simple design in the first place.

Enter the stellarator, of which the Wendelstein 7X is latest in the line. Conceding that any device that can keep a giant stew of stuff that makes our sun look cold from running amok is going to be complicated we're left just deciding what kinds of complications we want to keep. We need those poloidal fields and we can't do that with a symmetric set of field coils. Lyman Spitzer figured out awhile ago that if you shaped your magnets like a cruller rather than a simple donut, you'll get a field that was reasonably good at guiding plasma in a stable way. Unfortunately making metal components at large scale with very precise, and weird, shapes was and remains fairly challenging.

But we're getting better. Niobium-Titanium(NbTi) coils have been in use for a number of decades now and the production and working knowledge of how to shape them is advanced enough that making a giant cruller a little over 50 feet across outlined by 70 non-standard rings is now merely hard rather than laughably ludicrous. This hurdle was leapt in 2015 when the Wendelstein 7X had first plasma and validating all the simulations over series of small shots and upgrade periods.
