'''
https://physicstoday.scitation.org/pto/info/physics2000
What significant advance made in your field since 2000 deserves wider recognition among nonexperts? We invite you to write an essay for Physics Today that describes the advance, how it was made, and why it is important.
Entries should be no longer than 2000 words and be written at a level appropriate for the range of physical scientists, including students, who read Physics Today. Entries should not have been published previously.
particle density is ~3E20 vs 3E22 of air
temp is ~50E6

'''

Brilliant Ring of Fire

Let us discuss the most fantastical metalo-ceramic donut in the world, the Wendelstein 7X. In 2015 it lit first plasma and took its title as the largest confined plasma in the world, along side its title of unusually useful things that look like sculpted baked goods. The Wendelstein 7X has a confinement geometry of the stellarator type. This is distinct from the tokamaks that have dominated most of the research projects for the last few decades as the tokamaks symmetry around it's up and down axis makes it easier to build. In other words you would be able to notice a stellarator spinning atop a  merry go round, the same is not true for an idealized tokamak.

For the unfamiliar, confining a plasma is rather tricky because it tends to be incredibly, unfathomably hot. Temperatures that are in the "that's just a big number and I have no frame of reference" regime of things. To try and build up a scale, an electric stove top that's glowing red hot will be in the 500 kelvin range. Ten times hotter than that we get to the surface of the sun in the neighborhood of 5000 kelvin. But since stellarators are trying to explore and emulate some of the physics that happen /inside/ stars, the surface isn't going to cut it and we need to get a thousand times hotter, into the 5 /million/ kelvin range of things. Alas, we're not done ramping up yet. See, our sun can get by generating about as much heat in a given volume as a backyard compost pile as it makes up on efficiency by literally being the biggest single thing in our solar system. The Wendelstein 7X is designed to accommodate temperatures 10 times hotter than the core of our sun, 50 million kelvin. This is, at risk of belaboring a point, rather piping hot and your standard issue oven mitts really will not suffice.

At this point we would be right to conclude we can't exactly "hold" a plasma the way we hold say, water or steam. It might be better to think of it as "guiding" a plasma. Normal gases are made up of electrons and nuclei bound together. A property of plasmas is that instead of being tightly bound together, these electrons and nuclei are independent of each other. A consequence of which is that they can be much more strongly effected by Electric and Magnetic fields. One of the early bits you do in an Electricity and Magnetism course is show that a single charged particle will travel in loops around constant magnetic fields but freely move /along/ them. This leads us to think that if you made magnetic field lines go in a loop, a plasma will be guided along like cars around a simple race track. The simplest shape that accomplishes that goal is the humble toroid. Imagine a typical donut wrapped in wire, and run a current through that. Now, while wrapping wire around a baguette and turning it on generates a uniform magnetic field, the donut does not. The magnetic field ends up being stronger towards the donut hole and weaker on the edge. Between that and the fact the fields curve around the donut hole instead of going straight, a whole heap of problems crop up. Mostly because of what helped us get this far in the first place, the plasma is charged and not only can be guided by fields, but it's movement also /makes/ fields.

Going into much depth as to the causes of these problems (also known as instabilities) is a rich and diverse subject that has literally taken up person-centuries of work. So I hope you'll allow me to gloss over it. The glib as all get out version is that a bare minimum for guiding plasma is that we have to make it run laps both around the donut hole, /and/ around the donut dough itself. This second kind of looping is accomplished if the magnetic fields have a poloidal component, which is just the mathematical term for the round-the-dough kind of looping.

One of the leading approaches to getting the poloidal field is coaxing the plasma into providing it itself. This is the route that the simpler tokamaks have mostly taken. If you can coax the electrons to move more or less in one way around the donut hole, and the ions to move, as a group, at a different speed, you'll get a net current which will produce a poloidal field. There are a few problems with this approach though: Getting the current started, keeping the current going and keeping the current under control. The easiest way to get the current started is by the method of induction. By slowly turning on large electromagnets sandwiching our chamber, a current in the plasma will be induced going in the opposite direction. The downside of this is that this current is only induced while the electromagnets are being turned on and so it's intrinsically going to be a pulsed sort of affair, constantly ramping up and down. And while this tremendous current is running it has a whole slew of it's own instabilities. Keeping them in check introduces a new set of engineering challenges which runs somewhat counter to the point of having a simple design in the first place.

Enter the stellarator, of which the Wendelstein 7X is latest in the line. Conceding that any device that can keep in check a giant stew of stuff that makes our sun look cold is going to be complicated we're left just deciding what kinds of complications we want to keep. We need those poloidal fields and we can't do that with a symmetric set of field coils. Lyman Spitzer figured out awhile ago that if you shaped your magnets like a cruller rather than a simple donut, you'll get a field that was reasonably good at guiding plasma in a stable way. Unfortunately making metal components at large scale with very precise, and weird, shapes was and remains fairly challenging.

But we're getting better. Niobium-Titanium(NbTi) coils have been in use for a number of decades now and the production and working knowledge of how to shape them is advanced enough that making a giant cruller a little over 50 feet across outlined by 70 non-standard rings is now merely hard rather than laughably ludicrous. This hurdle was leapt in 2015 when the Wendelstein 7X had first plasma and validating all the simulations over series of small shots and upgrade periods. These small shots, while not "steady state" from a human's perspective as they last about a breaths length of time, are quite long for something 10's of millions of degrees and serve quite well at validating the designs. Going forward more upgrades are planned and longer runs promise an exciting future and interesting possibilities. We've never had experimental observations of how a burning plasma runs long term so we'll get to observe how fusion byproducts behave in large quantities as opposed to the single reactions we've been able to reproduce in pulsed or collider experiments. One possible insight is to features of the interiors of stars. Given that there's all that hot swirling plasma between the surface of a star and where all the energy is being produced we've only had indirect observations based on seismic activity, these fusion reactors will allow us to observe directly circumstances analogous to these intense stellar conditions and understand new frontiers of the very dense and very hot.
